How-To: Configure Monitoring Alerts using Alertmanager (#141)
appuio/appuio-cloud-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-to/configure-alertmanager.adoc

apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: test-alert
spec:
  groups:
  - name: test-alert
    rules:
    - alert: TestAlert
      expr: vector(1)
      for: 10s
      labels: {} <1>
      annotations:
        summary: "Test Alert"
        description: "This is a test alert"
YAML
----
<1> Add labels to the alert to route it to the correct receiver.
Usually the default receiver is used if no labels are set.

. Check your configured receivers to see if the alert was received.
+
See <<troubleshooting>> for debugging tips.

. Delete the test alert.
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl -n "${APP_NAMESPACE}" delete prometheusrule test-alert
----

. Repeat the test for all receivers by adding the appropriate labels to the alert.

== Troubleshooting [[troubleshooting]]

OpenShift currently doesn't expose any logs or status information for the Alertmanager.
This makes it difficult to debug issues with Alertmanager.
The following section describes some common issues and how to debug them.

. Check all secret references.
+
One missing secret reference blocks the creation of all the receivers in the `AlertmanagerConfig`.

. Check the secret values.
+

> Wrong login credentials or missing certificates can cause the Alertmanager to fail to send alerts.

Author: Will add a debug your webhook section in a separate PR.

Author: Added in https://github.com/appuio/appuio-cloud-docs/pull/141/commits/7618e3135fe88b508320d44955d82f88daf5f19b

= Configure Alerts using Alertmanager

> {product} allows you to configure alerts receivers to notify you when an alert is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{product} allows you to configure custom alert receivers to notify you when an alert is triggered.
```

== Prerequisites

* Command Line Access to {product}

== Configure Alertmanager

OpenShift uses Alertmanager to manage alerts and send notifications to the correct receiver.

Alertmanager brings different integrations which can be listed by running `kubectl explain alertmanagerconfigs.spec.receivers`.

The following example shows how to configure Alertmanager to send alerts to Slack, Telegram, and email.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1beta1
kind: AlertmanagerConfig
metadata:
  name: my-alert-config
spec:
  receivers:
  - name: telegram <1>
    telegramConfigs:
    - apiURL: https://api.telegram.org
      botToken:
        key: token
        name: telegram
      chatID: 1234567890
      parseMode: HTML
  - name: default <2>
    slackConfigs:
    - apiURL:
        key: url
        name: slack
      channel: '#alerts'
  - name: out-of-office-hours <3>
    emailConfigs:
    - to: alerts@example.com
      from: my-app@example.com
      smarthost: smtp.example.com:587
      authUsername: my-app@example.com
      authIdentity: my-app@example.com
      authPassword:
        key: password

>         name: email

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        name: email-alert-auth
```

+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl -n "${APP_NAMESPACE}" apply -f - <<YAML
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1beta1
kind: AlertmanagerConfig
metadata:
  name: my-alert-config
spec:
  receivers:
  - name: default
    emailConfigs:
    - to: alerts@example.com <1>
      from: my-app@example.com <2>
      smarthost: smtp.example.com:587 <3>
      authUsername: my-app@example.com <4>
      authIdentity: my-app@example.com <5>
      authPassword: <6>
        key: password
        name: email
  route:
    groupBy: [alertname, instance]
    receiver: default
YAML
----
<1> The email address to send alerts to.
<2> The email address to send alerts from.
<3> The SMTP server to send alerts through.
Alertmanager doesn't support unencrypted connections to remote SMTP endpoints.
<4> The username to authenticate with.
If empty, Alertmanager doesn't authenticate to the SMTP server.
<5> The PLAIN identity to authenticate with.
Can be the same as the username.
Might be omitted for LOGIN protocol.
<6> The secret created earlier.

. Test the email receiver. See <<test-alerting>>.

== Routing Alerts [[routing]]

Alerts can be routed to different receivers based on the labels attached to the alerts.

> A `AlertmanagerConfig` resource defines a routing tree with a root route and child routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `AlertmanagerConfig` resource defines a routing tree with a root route and child routes.
```

== Test Alerting [[test-alerting]]

All changes to alerting routes and receivers should be tested to ensure that receivers are able to correctly receive alerts.

. Set the namespace you created the `AlertmanagerConfig` in.
+
[source,bash]
----
APP_NAMESPACE=my-namespace
----

. Create a test alert that's always firing.
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl -n "${APP_NAMESPACE}" apply -f - <<YAML
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: test-alert
spec:
  groups:
  - name: test-alert
    rules:
    - alert: TestAlert
      expr: vector(1)
      for: 10s
      labels: {} <1>
      annotations:
        summary: "Test Alert"
        description: "This is a test alert"
YAML
----
<1> Add labels to the alert to route it to the correct receiver.
Usually the default receiver is used if no labels are set.

. Check your configured receivers to see if the alert was received.
+
See <<troubleshooting>> for debugging tips.

. Delete the test alert.
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl -n "${APP_NAMESPACE}" delete prometheusrule test-alert
----

. Repeat the test for all receivers by adding the appropriate labels to the alert.

== Troubleshooting [[troubleshooting]]

> OpenShift currently doesn't expose any logs or status information for the Alertmanager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenShift currently doesn't expose any logs or status information for Alertmanager.
```

This makes it difficult to debug issues with Alertmanager.
The following section describes some common issues and how to debug them.

. Check all secret references.
+
One missing secret reference blocks the creation of all the receivers in the `AlertmanagerConfig`.

. Check the secret values.
+

> Wrong login credentials or missing certificates can cause the Alertmanager to fail to send alerts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alertmanager may fail to send alerts when the routing configuration has wrong login credentials or missing certificates.
```
